# Impact of Rating Agency Business Models and Regulatory Reliance on Credit Ratings
Information Acquisition and Rating Agencies Harold L. Cole and Thomas F. Cooley NBER Working Paper No. 31303 June 2023 JEL No. D80,G14,G18 ABSTRACT For decades credit rating agencies were viewed as trusted arbiters of creditworthiness and their ratings as important tools for managing risk. The common narrative is that the value of ratings was compromised by the evolution of the industry to a form where issuers pay for ratings. In this paper we consider both an investor-pays and an issuer-pays set-ups and show that if the investor- pays version can overcome the free-rider problem it is efficient, and otherwise leads to under- provision of information; while if the issuer-pays can force disclosure, it is efficient, but otherwise it leads to less revealing information because of the systematic distortion in revealed information along with over-investment in information. We show that in both these arrangements credit ratings have value in equilibrium and how reputation insures that, in equilibrium, ratings will reflect sound assessments of credit worthiness. We argue that regulatory reliance on ratings and the increasing importance of risk-weighted capital in prudential regulation have more likely contributed to distorted ratings than the matter of who pays for them. Harold L. Cole Economics Department University of Pennsylvania 3718 Locust Walk 160 McNeil Building Philadelphia, PA 19104 and NBER colehl@sas.upenn.edu Thomas F. Cooley New York University

# Credit rating agencies and their role in financial markets
1 Introduction Credit ratings, which are described as forward looking “opinions” of the relative credit worthiness of an entity or debt issue, are signals of the likelihood that the terms of a credit contract will be fully honored. They are important elements in the allocation of capital in the economy because they can influence the cost of borrowing for issuers and the rate of return for investors.1In this paper we study how credit signals are provided and why they have value in equilibrium. Many commentators on the financial crisis of 2007-2009 have argued that the major credit rating agencies – Fitch, Moody’s, and Standard & Poor’s – played a role in the crisis by assigning unrealistically high ratings to mortgage-backed securities, in particular to the upper tranches of collateralized debt obligations. Credit rating agencies are singled out in the Dodd-Frank Financial Reform Act as requiring further regulation and oversight. The Financial Crisis Inquiry Commission, which studied the root causes of the financial crisis, attributed many of the failures in financial markets to the fact that “ ...major firms and investors blindly relied on credit rating agencies as their arbiters of risk.“2This view of credit ratings and the firms that provide them as villains in the financial system represents a remarkable turnaround. For more than a century the credit rating agencies were viewed as important and valuable agents in the system, a view that was underscored by the fact that regulators at all levels relied on them to manage risk-taking in markets. The ratings business began in 1909 when John Moody first began to offer ratings on corporate bonds. He was followed in 1916 by the Poor’s Publishing Company, in 1922 by the Standard Statistics Company and in 1924 by Fitch Publishing Co. All of these publishers initially sold their ratings directly to investors. These credit ratings clearly had value for investors because they provided an independent assessment of the likelihood that the terms of debt contracts would be honored and investors continued to purchase the ratings. Financial regulators also began to view credit ratings as a valuable tool for managing risk- taking in financial markets. The first distinction between investment grade and non-investment 1This sentence waffles a bit because the direction of influence is not always the one anticipated– for example, where sovereign ratings are concerned. These are essentially anomalies. 2Financial Crisis Inquiry Commission, 2011

# Regulatory reliance on credit ratings and the evolution of rating-based capital requirements in U.S. financial regulation
grade securities in regulation was made in 1931 when the Office of the Controller of the Currency (OCC) ruled that bonds rated BBB or better could be carried on the balance sheets of banks at book value but lower rated bonds had to be marked to market. In 1936, the Federal Reserve Board and the OCC extended the reliance on ratings by ruling that banks could not hold bonds that were not rated investment grade by at least two agencies. From that point on the use of the distinction between investment grade and non-investment grade gradually spread. Throughout the 1940’s and 1950’s the insurance industry, whose companies were regulated by the states, moved toward a system of rule-based capital requirements where ratings played the crucial role. A major shift in the regulatory reliance on ratings occurred in 1975 when the Securities and Exchange Commission introduced the concept of Nationally Recognized Statistical Ratings Or- ganizations (NRSROs), initially Moodys, Standard & Poor’s, and Fitch. At the same time the SEC imposed on broker-dealers capital requirements that relied on ratings issued by NRSRO’s. Beginning in 1982 the SEC also simplified disclosure requirements for issuers of investment grade securities. In 1974 the Employee Retirement and Income Security Act was passed and signed into law initiating another major category of regulatory reliance on ratings. Administered by the De- partment of Labor, ERISA began to reference ratings. ERISA has been amended several times and since 1989 the DOL has permitted pension funds to invest in asset backed pass-through securities provided they are rated in one of the three highest categories by at least one of the four largest NRSROs. In 1989 the Financial Institutions Reform, Recovery and Enforcement Act prohibited Savings and Loan organizations from investing in non-investment grade securities. And in 1991 the Investment Company Act of 1940 was amended to require money market mutual funds to limit their investments to securities that are rated in one of the two highest categories by at least two NRSROs. There were other modifications to regulations that further increased the reliance on ratings but the ones just cited enshrined the use of ratings by NRSROs into the regulatory architecture in the U.S. Although they increased the reliance on ratings steadily over time, regulators also began to view the ratings agencies themselves as requiring regulation when the business model changed

# Evolution and efficiency of credit rating agency models in financial markets
from the “investor pays” structure to an “issuer pays” model in the 1970s.3We will construct a model within which we can illustrate how the investor-pays arrangement can be efficient if the free rider problem with respect to information generation via the ratings is overcome, but inefficient with too little information generated if it is not. We will also show that issuer-pays model can be efficient if the issuer has to truthfully reveal the information acquired, but inefficient if the issuer chooses whether or not to reveal its information, with too much information being being generated. Thus, the switch itself introduces potentially introduces inefficiencies with respect to information acquisition/revelation and portfolio allocations. Next, we will provide a microfoundation for the information generation mechanism by devel- oping a reputation based model of ratings agencies which applies equally to both the investor- and issuer- pays versions of our model. How did the view of credit rating agencies evolve from one of trusted arbiters of credit worthiness to suspect players in the financial system? In this paper we show how credit signals have value by describing a financial market the includes firms, investors and providers of signals. We show that these signals have value in equilibrium regardless of who pays for them. What causes the signals to become suspect? We argue that the reliance on them by regulators combined with an increase in the demand for “safe” assets relative to the supply are important factors in explaining the evolution of the industry and the informativeness of ratings. The standard concern with respect to the credit ratings agencies is the issuer both chooses the agency to rate its securities and pays for the rating. The issuers of credit instruments clearly want higher ratings to lower their cost of raising capital and can shop among firms to issue that rating. This conflict of interest has been the focus of most suspicion and criticism of the ratings business. But, credit rating agencies base their existence on their ability to provide objective assessments of the credit risk of securities. It is important to understand how this apparent conflict between the issuers of ratings and issuers of debt instruments gets resolved.4 3Many reasons have been offered for this evolution but a prominent one is that the advent of the Xerox machine undermined the rating agencies’ intellectual property protection and that there was a collective action problem for the many investors that made it easier for the ratings agencies to turn to the issuers. Perhaps an equally important reason is that the number of firms seeking access to capital markets increased over time. There was a problem for small and new firms who found it difficult to get rated unless they paid for it. The rating agencies were happy to respond to this need. 4It is important to recognize as well that the “investor pays” model would also be subject to conflicts. Currently

# The Role of Credit Ratings and Safe Assets in Financial Stability
13 The Demand for Ratings and the Supply of Safe Assets The example just cited is pertinent to the issues that arose during the financial crisis. The problems arose when the ratings agencies rated bundles of credit instruments that had been assembled in the form of Residential Mortgage Backed Securities (RMBS) or CDO’s based on them. As argued in Acharya et. al.(2009) the key ingredient in the financial crisis was the fact that financial firms were happy to retain highly rated tranches of mortgage backed securities they created in special purpose vehicles because of the yield they offered. In the context of our model the type Jinvestors actually leveraged their securities while meeting the quality requirements imposed by the government. This was how they managed to manufacture the tail risk that eventually caused the financial system to nearly collapse. The increasing reliance on ratings in order to risk weight assets for prudential regulation pur- poses increased the demand for “safe” assets - assets that met regulators standards. At the same time the growth of shadow banking and the increased use of derivatives and repo markets dra- matically increased the demand for safe assets as collateral for repo transactions and derivative positions. Repo and derivative transactions increased sharply in the 1990s and through 2007 and this increased demand for safe assets as collateral for short-term funding ran up against a limited supply of government issued safe assets. In 2001 the Bank for International Settlements pointed out that the increase in collateralized transactions that required collateral with inherently low credit and liquidity risk had outstripped the supply of safe assets (Gorton and Ordonez 2012). What has happened to the supply of safe assets and investment grade securities over time? In earlier periods, the private sector and the Treasury supplied the needs of markets quite well. But, over time, the supply of investment grade debt from the corporate sector declined relative to the demand (Gorton and Ordonez, 2012) and the supply of Treasury debt has fluctuated over time. Between fiscal 1992 and fiscal 1997, strong economic growth and rising tax receipts pushed the deficit down from $290 billion to $22 billion. In fiscal 1998 the federal government recorded a surplus of $70 billion for the first time in almost thirty years.The Congressional Budget Office at the time predicted that the surplus would increase steadily over the next ten years and would reach

# The relationship between government debt, private asset-backed securities, and financial stability in the context of safe asset shortages and credit risk
$381 billion in fiscal 2009. The shrinking deficit, and subsequent surplus, led to a concomitant decline in Treasury financing needs. Treasury officials reduced their monthly offerings of 2-year notes from $181.2 billion in 1996 to as little as $12 billion in 1998. Over the same interval, quarterly offerings of 3-year notes fell from $19 billion to $10 billion and weekly offerings of 13- and 26-week bills fell from around $14 billion each to $5.4 and $7.4 billion, respectively.12 The demand for safe assets has led to financial innovation and the creation of privately created “nearly riskless” assets that could fill the role of government backed safe assets and investment grade corporate debt. Gorton, Llewellen and Metrick (2010) showed that privately issued substitutes for government debt and highly rated privately issued debt, together, are a roughly constant fraction of all debt since the 1950’s. Krishnamurthy and Vissing-Jorgenson (2012) also document the relationship over time between government debt and private issued asset-backed near riskless private debt. They show that the net supply of privately issued debt is negatively correlated with the net supply of government debt. Many have argued that it was the complexity of the CDO’s of RMBS that enabled the agencies to rate collections of securities of different risks as being of high quality even though the returns reflected higher risks. Skreeta and Veldkamp (2009) argue that it was the complexity of these securities that facilitated ratings shopping by the financial institutions that were issuing them. It is also important to note that the regulated investors had access to inexpensive capital through the Federal Reserve if the rated securities created liquidity problems for them. In addition it is obvious ex-post that they had access to unpriced too big to fail insurance that made it even more attractive to hold assets of higher risk but with higher ratings. It is important to note that, as in the model, the ratings agencies continued to rate literally millions of more plain vanilla securities, corporate debt, sovereign debt and so on, where low performing ratings would be far more apparent. 12There is currently concern over a similar shortage of safe debt because the Fed is buying over 90% of new issuance by the Treasury

